May 27, 2024
University of the Fraser Valley
Faculty Search Committee
RE: Letter of support for the position of Assistant Professor, Teacher Education in the School of Education (Job Number J0424-1125)

I am pleased to offer this letter of support for Colin Madland in his application to the position of Assistant Professor in Teacher Education. Colin is a mature student who is working full-time, raising a family, and is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Educational Technology area of the Department of Curriculum and Instruction at the University of Victoria. Colin’s research focus is technology-integrated assessment practices in higher education. I strongly believe Colin is exceptional across all the criteria for this competition, namely: his contributions to the scholarly community through knowledge mobilization, publications, and community-engaged scholarship; his record of innovative teaching in large-enrolment, superdiverse undergraduate courses at the University of Victoria; his service to the educational community; and his record of awards, scholarships and grants.

### Knowledge Mobilization, Publications, & Community-Engaged Scholarship

Colin’s research is significant as it focuses on the intersection of faculty assessment practices and what researchers know about the measurement of student learning, an area which has come under increased scrutiny as universities have been forced by SARS-CoV-2 and generative artificial intelligence tools to reconsider traditional assessment practices. Colin’s research has provided insight into how instructors typically engage with technology in assessment, which has led to the development of a framework to explain the importance of socially just and Indigenist approaches to assessment. Colin has three peer-reviewed journal articles, 19 peer-reviewed national and international conference presentations (e.g., AERA, CSSHE and OTESSA  at Congress, International Council on Distance Education, Association for Learning Technologies, Open Education Conference), plus 18 professional higher education conferences. He is an active reviewer of peer-reviewed journal submissions in the field of open and online learning.

### Innovative Undergraduate Teaching

Colin has taught multiple high-enrolment sections of EDCI 335, EDCI 338 and EDCI 339 as a sessional instructor at UVic. These courses often attract a superdiverse student body from across the UVic community and Colin excels at ensuring equity of opportunity for each learner. Colin's approach to teaching is highly innovative as he incorporates modern web-authoring tools such as WordPress into the structure of his courses. Colin goes out of his way to provide collegial support for other Ph.D. and M.A. students and sessional instructors in our area. He participated in a very successful co-design and co-teach project with a fellow Ph.D. student, which led to the creation of a sustainable and extensible body of course materials. He is very collaborative in approaching his work and has extended this into support for the broader UVic community through three presentations in the “Let’s Talk about Teaching” conference offered through Learning and Teaching Support and Innovation (LTSI). 

### Service to the Community and/or Professional Activities and Affiliations

In addition to his academic success, Colin has been a practitioner in the educational technology community and has been very active in presenting at regional, national, and international conferences. Much of his recent work has been focused on improving understanding of technology-integrated assessment and advocating for more socially just and Indigenist approaches to assessment. His previous work focussed on the use of open education resources (OER) in higher education with a strong emphasis on increasing access to higher education for people who might otherwise be unable to participate. Colin is well-respected in the educational technology community in British Columbia and his most recent position, as Manager of Online Learning and Instructional Technologies at Trinity Western University (TWU), is focused on leading TWU in the development of a robust, flexible, and extensible technological infrastructure to support the differentiated dissemination of course materials to underserved populations in Canada as well as diverse international branch campuses of TWU. Under Colin’s leadership, his team was recognized with a Team Award for their work assisting the campus pivot to remote learning.

Additionally, he is a founding board member and the past-chair of the graduate student committee of Open/Technology in Education, Society, and Scholarship Association (OTESSA), a scholarly association that is a member of the Federation of the Humanities and Social Sciences in Canada. He was a key support as co-chair of the inaugural OTESSA Conference at Congress, which pivoted to a flexible format due to COVID-19 with an emphasis on asynchronous presentations and publication of conference proceedings/full papers. He was also part of the communications committee in creating this organization dedicated to bringing together researchers, practitioners, and administrators in the field of educational technology and open education/scholarship. Previously, he served two years as a board member representing researchers of the Canadian Network for Innovation in Education (CNIE).

### Awards, Scholarships, & Grants

Since joining the University of Victoria, Colin has been awarded a BCcampus Student Research Fellowship ($6000) and UVic graduate student scholarships of $5000 each in each of his two years of course-work (totaling $10,000). His application to the University of Victoria was strengthened by his academic achievements as a Masters student at Athabasca University which culminated with him being nominated for and receiving the Athabasca University Tim Byrne Memorial Scholarship ($1000) for academic excellence along with an outstanding thesis or project in June 2014. During his time at Thompson Rivers University, he was awarded $5000 from the TRU Open Learning Presentation Fund and was an Open Education Resources Research Fellow ($5000 USD). In total he has been awarded over $27,800. Colin has a consistent pattern of achievement and is unwavering in his work ethic. He ranks in the top 1% for academic communication, critical thinking, and research abilities. Colin completed his candidacy in the summer of 2021.

In closing, I strongly endorse Colin for the position of Assistant Professor of Teacher Education and hope the selection committee can support him as he moves into a tenure-track role. He is an exceptional student and I cannot overstate how deserving he is of this position.

Sincerely,


Dr. Valerie Irvine
Co-Director, TIE Research Lab
Department of Curriculum and Instruction
